# Random forest classifier for Pol II pausing loci
The predictive value of DNA features for identifying Pol II pause loci was determined using a Random Forest model with the randomForest R package (Breiman, 2001). All reproducible Pol II pause loci were included in these analyses, as were an equal number of shuffled control loci. The shuffled control loci were selected to maintain the same number of real and control loci in each gene, controlling for effects of differential gene expression. In total, 51 DNA features were compiled for all pause loci (Table S4) (Chiu et al., 2016; Oberbeckmann et al., 2019; Pelechano et al., 2013; Turner and Mathews, 2010; Umeyama and Ito, 2018; Vinayachandran et al., 2018; Weiner et al., 2015). Feature importance scores were generated using a random forest classifier with 75% training and 25% testing sets; for wild-type yeast, this is 9,245 training and 3,082 testing loci. Due to the low number of reproducible pauses identified in the dhh1∆ deletion strain, it was excluded from these analyses.

Reported feature importance values are the mean decreases of accuracy over all out-of-bag cross validated predictions, when a given feature is permuted after training, but before prediction. Optimized parameters were selected for random forest classifiers trained using all features or a limited set of DNA features (Figure S35). For all features, ncat = 5, mtry =  15, ntrees = 2500; for selected limited features,  ncat = 5, mtry = 2, ntrees = 2500. ROC curve and AUC measurements were determined from binary prediction probabilities and calculated using the ROCR R package (Sing et al.). The mean and standard error of the mean AUC is calculated from 10 iterations of training and testing the model on wild-type pauses. Prediction accuracy was determined by measuring the difference between the model’s predictions on a held-out test set and measured variables. The baseline score was determined using a “null” parameter that has the same value for every training and testing pair; thus, baseline represents the prediction accuracy with no additional information added to the model. To assess the transferability of a random forest classifier trained on Pol II pause loci in one strain, a model was trained on 100% of real and shuffled control Pol II loci from one deletion strain and then tested on all those pause loci in a second deletion strain that were not included in the training set.

# To create a random forest classifer for Pol II pause loci
1.
